---
layout: post
title: Digital Literacy Narrative Assignmnet
excerpt: Digital Literacy Narrative Assignmnet
modified: 6/04/2023, 2:00:24
tags: [intro, beginner, jekyll, tutorial]
comments: true
category: blog
---

As a university student taking an introductory course in Digital Humanities, I am discovering new ways to utilize technology in both my daily and academic life. Despite growing up in the digital age and having some familiarity with social media and content creation tools, it was not until this course that I fully appreciated the potential of technology for research data management, manipulation and analysis.

As a university student, I find myself relying heavily on social media platforms like Instagram, Twitter and Facebook to stay connected with friends and family, as well as to keep up with the latest news and events happening around campus. The convenience and accessibility of these platforms have been invaluable in helping me maintain social connections. 

Since joining NYUAD and declaring my major in Computer Science with a minor in Interactive Media, I have had the opportunity to explore a wide range of creative and technical tools. I have been introduced to softwares such as Adobe, Canva, Photoshop and Illustrator, which have helped me develop my skills in graphic design and image editing. Furthermore, my proficiency in programming languages such as Python and C++ has allowed me to create projects that combine technical and creative elements, such as a game that I coded using Processing.

In addition, I have also acquired proficiency in HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, which has enabled me to develop engaging and interactive web pages. Recently, in my Communication Lab course, I had the opportunity to work on video editing, which was a new experience for me. Although I had previously used tools like Instagram Reels and iMovie to create short videos, this project pushed me to learn new skills and techniques for editing and storytelling. Overall, these experiences have broadened my perspective on the intersection of technology and creativity, and I am excited to continue exploring this field further.

I have relied on technology to manage my academic work and data. Previously, I mainly used Google Drive for storing and organizing my academic papers and projects, and Microsoft Excel for basic data analysis. However, after enrolling in an introductory course in Digital Humanities, I discovered the significance of proper data organization through the article “Data Organization in Spreadsheets” by Karl and Kara. The article highlighted the importance of consistency in data organization, especially when manipulating data for various purposes such as mapping, which I had the opportunity to explore using Kepler. I realized that data organization is crucial for successful analysis and visualization. The article helped me understand how to optimize my data organization for different research projects.

During this Digital Humanities course, I was introduced to a variety of tools for data analysis and visualization, such as Project Gutenberg, Voyant tools, and programming languages like Python and R. These tools allowed me to extract text data and perform network analysis, which was something new to me. Additionally, I gained an appreciation for the importance of metadata, which I learned about while working with the Digital Library of the Middle East. One of the most interesting aspects of the course was learning about different ways to represent data through visualization and mapping. Kepler was one such tool that I used to explore the same dataset in different ways, and I was fascinated by the different meanings that could be derived from the same set of data through different visualizations. 

While working on the image classification assignment, I had the opportunity to work with Orange and delve into the world of image recognition and categorization. I was amazed by the advanced capabilities of our systems in accurately identifying and grouping images, which made me reflect on how this parallels the prevalent practice of categorizing individuals based on their physical appearance in today's society. Just as our systems assign labels and make judgments based on visual characteristics, humans tend to categorize and make assumptions about others based on their outward appearance. This parallel between machine classification and societal categorization highlighted the underlying biases and potential prejudices that can arise in both contexts. I gained valuable insights into the importance of acknowledging the cultural, political, social and economic influences that shape datasets. This awareness is crucial to prevent the reinforcement of biases and unfair categorizations. Added to this, I learnt that prioritizing inclusivity and diversity in dataset creation is vital. By ensuring a wide representation of demographics and characteristics, biases can be mitigated and fairness in the classification process can be promoted. The article by Eryk Salvaggio, "How to Read an AI Image," shed further light on the subject by highlighting the significant influence of cultural, political, social and economic factors in shaping datasets. This analogy between framing an image and framing a dataset resonated with me deeply. It made me realize that creating a dataset is not a neutral or objective task, but rather a process embedded within specific contexts and perspectives. 

Furthermore, engaging in the “unproject” was a valuable learning experience that fostered reflection on my thought processes and encouraged the development of skills in reflective analysis and contextualization. Throughout the project, we focused on integrating social aspects into our projects within the digital humanities framework. This experience not only taught me how to think critically and propose well-considered projects but also highlighted the importance of teamwork and effective collaboration. The article by Lynne Siemens, "It’s a team if you use 'reply all': An exploration of research teams in digital humanities environments," provided valuable insights into collaborative dynamics within digital humanities research teams. It underscored the importance of open communication, active participation and inclusivity in achieving successful outcomes as a team.  

Taking this course has not only equipped me with valuable skills for research data management and analysis but also shed light on the potential dangers of excessive reliance on AI. As a regular social media user, I was aware of the possibility of fake content, but I never fully grasped the extent of the issue until I came across an article by Kim Eckart titled "A growing problem of 'deepfake geography': How AI falsifies satellite images." In the article, Eckart highlights how satellite images have become a crucial tool for various applications such as disaster response, urban planning, and military surveillance. However, with the rise of advanced digital image manipulation technology, it has become easier to create fake satellite images that can mislead people. This phenomenon is known as "deepfake geography." It is crucial for individuals and organizations to remain vigilant and develop improved methods for verifying the authenticity of images and videos to prevent potential harm caused by deepfake geography. The potential threats of AI and deepfake technology serve as a reminder to approach technological advancements with caution and to always consider the potential consequences. 

As I move forward in my education and career, I am committed to staying updated on the latest advancements in technology and digital humanities. Moreover, I recognize the utmost importance of upholding ethical standards and practicing responsible use of these tools. The knowledge and skills I have gained from this course will undoubtedly serve as valuable assets as I embark on my academic and professional journey. They have provided me with valuable insights and equipped me to navigate the ever-evolving landscape of technology and digital humanities with a sense of responsibility and informed decision-making.

